---
layout: post
title: Running out of STE(A)M
date: 2016-11-30 12:00:00
categories: Articles
tags: 'Innovation, Practice, Conference'
image: null
---

In October, I presented at the Australian Architectural School Association (AASA) conference. The title for the event was “Project to practice: Innovating Architecture” and focused on two major questions, where is architecture creating its future, and how is the sector shaping the policy and funding levers of tomorrow? I submitted a paper entitled “Running out of STE(A)M: A Critical Perspective on the Political Rhetoric of Innovation” and presented a twenty-minute summary. The paper argued that political power, in particular, the Australian Turnbull Government, used innovation as a political tool. New economic policy proclaimed that democratised innovation would distribute wealth and continue Australian economic growth beyond the resource boom. I sought to uncover the assumptions and hidden strategies that lie in the use of innovation towards increasing corporate and institutional access, acquisition and control of knowledge. The paper aimed to demonstrate that the paradigm of resource manipulation, where a perceived scarcity and market demand drives the price of natural materials, had been transferred onto the realm of data, information and knowledge, or as McKenzie Wark puts it, had created a “vectorization of information”[^6c2b9755].

This vectorisation represents a placement of capitalist ideology, property ownership and market based value extraction, onto an abundant resource. I am personally critical of capitalism for its rampant need for “growth” and “progress” which translates into the unethical exploitation of the biosphere for profit generation. I’m also critical of the unequal distribution of wealth capitalism has produced and its boom to bust cyclic nature that governments treat as a necessary evil.

The name “Running out of STE(A)M” was a response to the Australian government’s “Ideas Boom” policy that sought to increase Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths in schools, with the aim of increasing innovation in the future. My main critique was in the loss of Art as a necessary connection back to everyday life, and a counter to the observed trend of innovation for innovation’s sake within STEM. When art is compared within a framework of efficiency, productivity and return on investment, it cannot compete. The creative and cultural industry provided $86 billion in 2014 but only contributed 6.9% of the overall GDP (ABS), as a result many Australian states have cut arts funding. An economic lens applied to a critical cultural driver misses what art’s role is in society, to provide means of understanding and interrogating our world.

The only culture that the ideas boom referred to was tech startup and entrepreneurial culture, to which my paper was also critical. The US has shown how important tech innovation and startups can be in generating wealth, and how important entrepreneurial thinking is towards this. Subsequently, every government wants to replicate a version of Silicon Valley. This is problematic as beyond economic success it has show to have issues with elitism[^c0ea01a0], sexism [^2f21c4b7] and racism [^bc14eba3] in its drive to make the world a better place.

The promotion of start up culture and STEM in schools redistribute the pressures of business and drive for profit into an environment which should support free exploration and discovery. The promoted vision that entrepreneurs, startups and tech innovation can lead to fame and wealth a la Musk or Zuckerberg, should not be a driver of knowledge generation at school level. Rather than conforming to an existing political and financial system it should provide opportunity to imagine something better.

The ideas around the paper referred heavily to Goodbun, Klein, Till and Rumpfhuber's enlightening book "The Design of Scarcity" [^b1129747] that describes how architects help to maintain a capitalist system of scarcity and desire, within the built environment, I thoroughly recommend it. Energy directed towards architectural design and innovation is absorbed by forces of capital generation, and subsequently decisions towards built outcomes are made by those with the economic means of development and aligned towards maximising profit. On large commercial projects, the architectural profession has found itself simply engaged to maximise gains through generating value in the building as a commodity. “Value Engineering” has become the driving parameter of spatial outcomes and the socially aligned profession of architecture, becomes subservient to corporations.

The paper concluded with some ways that architects could avoid being complicit in capitalism’s misfortunes. In summary, it looked at how architects could move towards socially concerned development, realign design focus away from buildings as commodities, and shift the mindset to celebrate the abundant rather than controlling scarcity. As Carlo Ratti and others have proposed architects should redirect their innovative energy towards developing an ecological view of buildings, its ambition should be to generate value through the processes and relations that come before and after a built outcome. New technologies such as the blockchain can provide ways to develop alternative sources of revenue through fostering community and social use value. This could help circumnavigate markets monopolised and controlled by those with access to capital.

Jeremy Rifkin in his book Zero Marginal Cost Society [^f5c544bb] convincingly describes how abundance will soon become a condition due to innovation within our energy, communications and transport infrastructures. This abundance does not benefit from exclusive access and control, it wants to be shared, but this is a hard financial relationship to convince architects. Professional practices are forced to protect their work and ideas in an economy that rely on property law and resource ownership. Ideas and knowledge are an abundant resource, but this energy is wasted within a system which values creativity so cheaply that it expects free entry into design competitions like it is an enthusiastic hobby. Architects need to realise that a collective pooling of resources, knowledge and ideas will reciprocate input and ultimately benefit the built environment. The creation of an architectural commons, similar to open source projects or Wikipedia, could achieve this. Peer to peer collaboration and production, where sharing is the dominant mode of operation, has been shown to thrive on social benefit rather than wealth and can allocate resources based on need rather than under economic or managerial influence [^7045553f].In such an environment of sharing, value is shifted towards the benefit of a larger group, rather than supply and demand.

Greater digital connectivity and ethical tracking of people and things can provide empirical evidence of cause and effect, connecting action to environmental or humanitarian benefits. This I hope will help us move away from a current economic system which is unable to detect pricing impact beyond its immediate availability and current need. Sharing of architectural resources would not result in an impoverished communism where equality is forced on a collective; it is what Michel Bauwen’s refers to as “Collective Individuality” where economic gain correlates to effort placed on a greater good.

Capitalism isn’t going anywhere soon, but that doesn’t mean architects have to settle for it. They should start to covertly explore alternatives, try and avoid the proprietary and profit-driven nature of neo-liberal markets forces and realign its energy towards the provision of a fair and just society with an abundance of fulfilling cultures.

[^6c2b9755]: Wark, M. A Hacker Manifesto, Harvard University Press, 2004

[^b1129747]: Goodbun, J. Klein, M. Till, Jeremy. & Rumpfhuber, A. The Design of Scarcity, Strelka Press: Moscow, 2013

[^7045553f]: Bauwens, M. The Political Economy of Peer Production M. Kroker & A. Kroker, eds. CTheory, 2005, Available at: <http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=499> [Accessed May 9, 2016].

[^f5c544bb]: Rifkin, J., 2014. The zero marginal cost society, New York, NY : Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.

[^bc14eba3]: Kosoff, M. Does Silicon Valley Have a Racism Problem? Vanity Fair, 2016, Available at: <http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/06/does-silicon-valley-have-a-racism-problem> [Accessed July 18, 2016]

[^2f21c4b7]: Revolving Door, Huffington Post, 2016, Available at: <http://www.huffingtonpost.com/lisen-stromberg/problem-with-women-in-tech-the-pipeline-or-the-revolving-door_b_6992522.html> [Accessed July 18, 2016]

[^c0ea01a0]: Watson, R. In Silicon Valley, Young white males are stealing the future from everyone else.The Guardian, 2016, Available at: <https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/27/in-silicon-valley-young-white-males-are-stealing-the-future-from-everyone-else>
