---
layout: post
title: Why Architecture needs a new definition of data.
date: 2018-05-09
categories: Writing
tags: [Architecture, Practice, Data]
image: null
---

"Data" is a widely employed word in contemporary western lexicons, its popularity relates to the rise of ubiquitous computing within society and the economic growth of data wrangling[1^] internet platforms. However, the definition and use of the term differ concerning human perception and information technology. In the physical world, data is used to describe the detection of a lack of uniformity as perceived by an "Informational Organism"[^2] understood as the human detectable translation of physical variations that requires cognitive processing. In computational terms data relates to the transfer of information and describes the smallest form, either in an analogue signal (differing amplitude) or digital bits (1/0)[^3]. A contrast exists in an attitude towards meaning, in human cognitive terms data is distinguishable from information, the latter defined as holding semantic content through the supplement of meaning[^4], but within information technology, the terms data and information are used interchangeably with data representing information. Ultimately confusion exists as data can be used to describe objective facts, transmit information signals, or identify symbols.     

In contemporary life, the cultural understanding of data is predominantly tied to technology such as laptops, tablets and smartphones with the "cloud" providing detached storage accessible via the global digital network, the Internet. The status of data in producing business intelligence has steadily increased in parallel with the progression of information technology enabling larger and faster processing. As a result, the notion of the professional expert, someone who develops knowledge through the application of information, is under pressure from sophisticated pattern detection and statistical prediction modelling available through data science[^5]. The increased availability of digital data and computational processing has consequently assisted advances in machine learning[^6].

## A definition for architectural practice.
In contemporary architectural discourse, the two understandings of data described above relate to two distinct ideologies in design, phenomenology and data-driven design. While phenomenological practice focusses on the perception of data through the body and its cognitive transfer into semantic information, data-driven computational design is concerned with how factual data maps into geometric form towards optimal spatial outcomes. The increasing interaction and integration of technology with the human body lead to the prospect of the post-human[^7]. The prospect of cybernetic organisms requires an understanding of data that resists the duality of digital/physical, body/technology or art/science. Such a resistance enables architectural space to deal with the interaction between physical and digital processes as a combination of quantitative and qualitative flows and intensities. As the realm of atoms becomes increasingly enveloped in a relationship with the realm of atoms what theories, conceptual frameworks or mediums are valuable for architectural design to expand its repertoire for spatial conditions?

This series of writings will explore how architectural practice can contribute to, or be transformed by, the intermingling of bits with atoms [^8]. As digital objects increasingly organise and shape the experience of the physical world through interfaces that combine human and computational data, what affect will this have for new architectural outcomes?   


[^1]: The term "Wrangling" is used to describe the process of data collection and protection that has become prevalent by online platforms. It is used by Bruce Sterling to highlight the struggle for control of the internet and the emerging internet of things through forms of machine surveillance. Sterling, Bruce. 2013. _The Epic Struggle of the Internet of Things_. Moscow: Strelka Press.   
[^2]: Floridi, Luciano. 2010 _Information: A very short introduction_, Oxford University Press, Oxford. Floridi identifies a pre-existing condition, pure data, as a form of proto-epistemic data, or what Floridi refers to as “Dedomena”, occurring through patterns or fields of differences in the universe.        
[^3]: Claude Shannon's Mathematical Theory of Communication argued that all information was the same independent of technology or medium and all information could be reducible to bits. Shannon, Claude E. 1948. _A Mathematical Theory of Communication_ The Bell System Technical Journal, Vol. 27, pp. 379–423, 623–656   
[^4]: The connection to meaning refers to Floridi's General Definition of Information (GDI) which argues that data must comply with the meanings (semantics) of the chosen system, code or language considered. Floridi, Luciano, _"Semantic Conceptions of Information"_, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2017 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/entries/information-semantic/>.
[^5]: Neil Cukier, Kenneth and Viktor Mayer-Schoenberger. 2013. "The Rise of Big Data." Foreign Affairs, April 03. The availability and analysis of large data sets has come to be known as Big Data, shifting scientific thought from causation to one of correlation.
[^6]: ibid. Machine learning has benefited from large sets of data to train computer algorithms through supervised and recently unsupervised learning.  
[^7]: For more on the concept of the post-human see Hayles, Nancy Katherine. 1999. _How we Became Posthuman_. 2. print. ed. Chicago [u.a.]: Univ. of Chicago Press.
[^8]: Rather than a dematerialisation of atoms into bits as described by Nicholas Negroponte in Being Digital, the digital and physical become the same thing as interfaces expand out into all material situations. See Cyber-Human Systems - https://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=504958         
