---
layout: post
title: Data and Standards
date: 2018-09-03
categories: writing
tags: 'PhD, Data'
image: null
---

If you are in or around architecture you are most likely looking at the material register of numerous spatial and dimensional standards. Door widths, ceiling heights, window thickness, furniture dimensions adhere to a certain set of standards that differ across geographical boundaries. The standards inherent in architecture are set for a minimum level of material or spatial outcome, generally decided upon by governmental bodies or institutions, and defined in reference to human rights. As the equality of human subjects vary across state lines and political ideology, standards likewise vary in their importance and extent. While standards promote cooperation through a limited but shared reference point, they also constrain choice and homogenise understanding through a set frame of reference. So while standards are seen to promote social cohesion, it also achieves control through a narrowing of material culture.

In architecture this relationship is recognisable in the standards set by national or local government, and by professional institutions, in Australia encapsulated into the Building Code of Australia and the Australian Standards. In Australia these reference books provide data, that is information without meaning, that links together agreed technical standards across a building project involving architects, engineers, builders and specialist consultants. While the set of Australian standards provide an expectation of final material outcome it can be connected to early twentieth century modernist ways of thinking around mass production and the universal image of the human subject.

Standards around building design and production emerge in the 1930s, first Charles Ramsey and Harold Sleeper’s Architectural Graphic Standards (1932), but then Ernst Neufert's Architects Data Handbook (1936). Set in the contemporary data-driven landscape the Data Handbook appears like a primitive form of data collection and sharing, a pre-network form of open data, but at a closer look it was something more ambitious and unfortunately sinister. Nader Vossoughian demonstrates that in presenting a set of data for spatial standards in architectural design, an ambition to increase socialisation, self-realisation and social formation and save economic factors of time and effort, the Data Handbook came to determine repeatable material constructions that absorbed the biases of its authors, normalised a culture of restricted knowledge and became instrumentalised towards the organisation of a Nazi Germany's immense military and industrial complex, standards don't seem so great now do they.

While data in the handbook cannot be blamed for the gradual dehumanisation of architecture through standardisation it is worth considering how standards influence the material world in the contemporary role of data within global networks and planetary scale computing. For Vossoughian the organissation of Neufert's data into encyclopedias and handbooks governed the design of design, this compares directly to Galloway's notion that the technical standards, or protocols, involved in the internet and software "governs the architecture of the architecture of objects" expanding the same of standardisation from discrete constructions to systems of material assemblies. This draws a parallel with Neufert's Data Handbook and modern data bases in that centralised control still exists in apparently decentralised systems of data distribution, the book and internet are not so dissimilar after all. What has progressed is the nature of standards from control over material to a concurrent control on material and information through controlled vectors of communication.   

Introduce Assemblage of data - move beyond standards - only standards because of the medium and the control of dissemination, authority. Why is the assemblage of data - standards - so powerful?

A standard is a product of the complex ways in which the design, organization, and production of knowledge have been intimately interwoven. p 50

Architectural design creatively synthesises knowledge into material representation, when standards restrict knowledge design is left to work on a limited set of potentialities. Architecture is an unfortunate pawn in this game of standards, emancipated from the repetitive work of measurement but complicit in the spread of standards as a cultural calcification through material and spatial outcomes. It is not clear whether this relationship has always existed so the thesis will consider how the assemblage of data data
