---
layout: post
title: Trying Fologram
date: 2018-12-13
categories: Journal
tags: [Mixed Reality]
image: null
---

There has been a lot of recent ups surrounding Mixed Reality ever since Microsoft and Magic Leap announced their headset technologies in 2017. I recently tried the Hololens in a workshop exploring its potential for computational design and digitally assisted hand assembly. This was all enabled by the Fologram team who were demoing their software and previous projects.

Mixed reality differs slightly from Augented Reality (virtual objects placed within an camera image of reality) and differs a lot from Virtual reality (a complete virtual image) by providing a virtual overlay onto a clear screen in front of your eyes. The effect is   Easy on the eyes as the only pixel information it must take in is added to the normal view of the world. For architecture this has many benefits which I will now consider.

Mixed reality coupled with a three dimensional model can project virtual geometry into space, the effect is a new type of architectural representation. Instead of describing architecture through flat drawings or screens, virtual form is overlaid onto a surface so it can be vieweable through the position of the body and head rather than the position of a virtual camera. From the perspective of constructing material assemblies this is very useful as it can show accurately where to place and join materials into a structure. What is more a number of hololens headsets can exist in the same model meaning multiple people can join in the construction.

With this basic setup opportunities for innovation exist in the way users can interact with the model in space through gestures, and through how geometry is processed within the Rhino and grasshopper environments. A full cyber=physical system is possible where input into the hololens by interacting with the virtual overlay feeds into a parametric model, which calculates adjustments and then feeds back into the virtual overlay. In the hololens environment the human user can design within the context while computation can calculate material performances. 

The applications of the system are already being explored with teams of students constructing advanced structures from timber and metal and using fixing methods such as tiying and welding. The combination of dynamic digital model and 1:1 virtual overlay means that tasks that previously required tacit material knowledge and craft skill can be done by anyone with hands and arms.   

The potential towards a democratisation of making is obvious but I had some other critical thoughts. It is not hard to connect the hololens to the impact of manufacturing machines in the industrial revolution, each made it easier to make things and increase the quality of material artifacts but there were severe social and cultural impacts caused by mass production. While I'm not saying the hololens will have the negative impact of industrial production but it is worth considering thee human impact of information and expertise projected into space rather than encapsulated in the brain. If there is no need to learn the behaviour of a material through extensive creative practice then a source of stimulation and expression is lost from human existence. Not everyone has the ability and time to be a crafts person but the experience gained is a highly  subjective experience and remains with the body for life. For a culture that no longer values that time and experience it is difficult to see the possibility of entering into such a practice.

When manufacturing machines brought in efficiencies in making and material use it also brought a cultural shift in human management. The initial project of economic management of human energy to liberate workers from the machine, ultimately tied them back to the machines through new types of employment structures and exploitative practices. If a headset allows multiple unskilled people to make high qualit y material construction the skills and wages will reduce and the numbers will increase, think mechanical Turk building a house.     

This may seem far fetched but it is important to think about how a technology can be applied to exploitative as well as liberating endevours. For the meantime though I will be trying out my beta demo of Fologram to start making some models I never previously could manage by hand, I just eend to beg steal or borrow a $7000 Hololens.    