---
layout: post
title: Data and spatial protocol 
date: 2018-10-09
categories: Writing
tags: [Data, Commodification]
image: null
---

Why Yuval Noah Harari is wrong about western liberal economies.

In the book twenty one lessons for the tewnty first century Yuval Noah Harari argues in liberal capitaist economies the customer is always right, from recent experience however this age old adage becomes less relevant when dealing with department stores. The title is designed to get you reading, hopefully you are still taking in these words so I feel I should set your expectations, I find Harari's books very useful in understanding the stories and cultural systems humans have put in place to organise and control other humans, and how much information technology and biological technology is disrupting them. A recent experience with a faulty pair of shoes and a unwillingness to refund made me reconsider Harari's position. Data and information technology already provides retail with ways to very accurately personalise commercial offers to customers. To calibrate messages that appeal requires as many points of data exchange as possible, this is why loyalty cards, credit cards and online interaction are very valuable to businesses who need to sustain the flow of goods. After being told that I could not exchange a faulty pair of shoes because I did not have access to the right detailed information (itemised item price on the day of purchase) I realised that the control of data flow for the customer is just as important. So I admit it, I didn't have a receipt, four months after purchasing the shoes I had not expected to be back compaining how poorly made they were, despite having a bank statement that showed the sale, the price and the date, this was not enough. It would have been fine to return them or exchange them if I had used their card (I don't touch loyalty cards), or recorded the sale through their app (for the one time I shopped their, and the last), but as it was my word and not backed up my specific data it was a no go. So what happened to "the customer is always right"? It seems that as data alows greater targeting of customers it also allows a vocabulary of quantification and evidence to seep into retail spaces. The greater data available on products, sales, and customers the more directly each decision is based on an immediate commercial outcome, in my case no data, no show replacement. I'm not a regular customer of any retail business for this reason, it used to be the case that through the customer being right it would foster trust and regular business, now data ties a customer to their last purchase with a loss of vision towards cultivating a relationship. So this is why I think Harari is wrong about the customer in advanced capitalism, they are profiled to the level that the level of "rightness" is determined by your data interaction with them, the customer is only right if they are participating in the infrastructure of data exchange   
