---
layout: post
title:  "Practice Led Research"
date:   2016-11-06 12:00:00
categories: Articles
tags: Architecture, Practice, Research, Interactive, Physical Computing
image:
---
I’m in the process of studying for a PHD in architecture at the moment and the stage one research defence for my thesis is approaching .  I have been reading solidly for eight months so have enough new knowledge to be dangerous, but don’t yet have the experience or level of critical skill to be able to quickly construct new knowledge for unearthing new connections or gaps in knowledge. To add to this, I am using elements of my architectural design practice as a methodology in the research. The method of practice-led research (plr) is relatively new in academia emerging in the late 80s, early 90s and steadily growing in popularity with artists and designers. Practice-led research, or creative research, appeared in research as traditional methods were unable to deal with research around reflexive practice that didn’t fit within a wholly objective or subjective epistemology. Incorporating a creative element to a PHD in architecture makes sense as representation and simulation are what we do. Creative methodologies of drawing, modelling, coding, graphic designing, making all contribute to particular architects design processes so there seems no reason why they cannot be appropriated to research, the problem is I’m just a bit bored by them. I started the PHD to try and develop something new in my practice but with the stage 1 looming over me the prospect of learning a new technique is a daunting prospect. Anyway what technique am I interested in, why did I get into this, who am I as a designer / researcher, what the hell am I researching? To try and help me make some decisions, and provide a self-administered form of therapy I decided to try and provide answers.

In 2015 I was working in practice and focusing my time on computational data driven design, advanced construction, fabrication and production, the majority of my time was spent creating elaborate construction and fabrication drawings for humans to follow, and consequently spending time on the phone explaining them. I became tired and disillusioned with the way my time and skills were valued by those in receipt of my drawings and needed a change. During 2015 I travelled to the US on the Byera Hadley travelling scholarship to study the maker movement and became interested in the politics of DIY digital fabrication and the ways that the internet had rewritten many of the rules in society.

A change in parenting responsibilities meant that I could not work long hours expected in practice anymore, so I decided it was an opportunity to move into research and academia and explore these new interests on my terms. The initial proposal sought to explore participation of non-architects into the design process, and the potential for DIY production in architecture, looking to empower communities of enthusiastic amateurs. My design practice was interested in how architecture could be developed and represented in a way that non-experts could adapt and construct for their own or collective means.

The main areas for research sat within expanded architectural practice, DIY / open source participation, HCI research / urban engagement, architectural computing and digital fabrication systems. Ultimately the proposal was interested in how architects could design systems rather than buildings as commodities, within the traditional procurement processes in the construction industry. Initially, it was looking at the architect as a facilitator in participatory processes, but I was keen to move away from this as it was a hot topic and a balanced view was already in place. The outcome of the PHD at this stage was to develop soft or hard systems to generate capacity for collective action in architecture, specifically urban interventions.

What came from this though was the notion of the “producer” or “prosumer” where networked computation provides the means for amateur participation within professional fields that previously utilised expensive design or production tools.  The produser (productive user) emerged from Wikipedia and blogs and has since emerged in the development of hardware products such as drones and kitesurfing. My reflection on this was that in considering the “produser” it shifts the traditional treatment of users in architecture from passive consumers into potential producers, the initial question was what this production would be?

To shift the research focus to what practice would emerge from this consideration, I reviewed who I thought I was as a designer and researcher. I found this easier to answer concerning my design as I have a collection of projects to refer to from within academia and within (other peoples) architectural practices. I worked for supermanoeuvre for two years and the approach that Dave Pigram and Iain Maxwell influenced me greatly. During that time design energy was spent on architecture, lighting, pavilions, digital sensors, websites, graphic promotion material, each design process utilised or developed techniques of computational design involving predetermined software based algorithms, or our own. Where I found myself diverting away from their practice was the siloed nature of the practice’s knowledge and the backgrounding of social or cultural critical reflection. Technique was, and is, the driving innovative force within computational design and advanced fabrication in supermanoeuvre’s practice and Australian architectural academia, and this to me seemed a shallow exploration. During this time I realised what was important for me and it focussed around openness and an architectural field willing to collectively progress rather than as an institution or individual practice. Admittedly I didn’t have to deal with the realities of economics in practice, but the prospect of sharing and collaborative development excited me and its existence online suggested it could be possible.

My previous professional experience in digital communications and my interest in design through algorithms led me into having a side interest in web technologies for 2D and 3D creative production. What drew me to this was the open nature of the tools used (HTML, CSS, Javascript), and ability to easily share my work and code. By learning to programme the virtual I realised I was able to control the physical via digital sensors and actuators and this started to open up new ways of thinking about architecture and space through interactive systems and information flow, namely the internet of things (IOT). Reading around IOT, I realised the ubiquity of computers, enormity of immaterial data flow, and the influence of software and its algorithms in human behaviour in the built environment. From here my PHD shifted focus.

So to locate my research into a general area of investigation I look towards Interactive Architecture and the emerging Media Architecture sub-disciplines. These disciplines are interested in how buildings perform through advanced networked computation and foster collaborative relationships with its inhabitants. In both architecture moves away from static compositions of materials and light towards producing dynamic context aware spatial ecosystems and ecologies. At the centre of this is a consideration of how humans interact with buildings and ultimately intelligent machines. The increasingly networked society provides the backdrop for research into how information infrastructure, material systems and humans interact to produce new readings and experiences in architecture.

The particular question focuses in on how interactivity and information / data production can realign the financial relationships that exist in the creation and performance of architecture. The research is necessary to address the profession's capacity to adapt to new economic contexts emerging around peer to peer sharing, collaboration and social use value. A focus on inhabitant interaction with data-driven performances of architecture provides an opportunity for architects to move towards designing human ecologies rather than commodities for investor returns. 
